let's try that okay looks like we're
going alright howdy there internet
people it's Bo again so tonight we have
a bit of a professional heckler with us
but today he's gonna talk about
something a little bit more important to
what's going on so if you want to know
what's going on you want to be able to
follow along go ahead and head over to
HTTP colon slash slash vit dot the Y
slash NYC Co our Oh vir asked - yes to
it all right so tell us about yourself
my name's andy Ratto I'm 35 I live in
Brooklyn New York and I'm one of the
lead organizers of the New York City
united against coronavirus information
and resources document which has become
a clearinghouse of information about
mutual aid projects in New York City
responding to coronavirus as well as
other forms of information and resources
which individuals can use as we respond
to this ongoing pandemic situation
something you're doing on this
particular project is a collection of
individuals what people will be able to
see as they browse the document or as
people do research in their own
communities is there our variety of
resources available responding to
coronavirus engaging in these sorts of
mutual aid projects some are from the
Gov
some are from established nonprofits
some are from new groups and some are
really just kind of loosely connected
individuals and I think that all of
those different organizations have a
role to play in the weeks and months
ahead so what are you first yeah I mean
I think it's you know we're in this sort
of strange situation where a lot of
existing problems are really being
heightened in extreme ways under
coronavirus so there's nothing new about
food insecurity or housing insecurity or
a lack of access to medical resources
and those problems were all being dealt
with by charities by mutual aid
organizing by governmental organizations
by nonprofits etc and because the need
became so extreme so quickly a lot of
people were having trouble finding what
was available in connecting with
resources and so I became a guide in
some sense to help people find what they
were looking for and that was a lot of
the initial impetus for me to get
involved in this specific way I'm also
involved in other more direct mutual aid
organizing in terms of helping people
get access to food and responding to
other needs that I'm doing in by my
neighborhood of bed-stuy Brooklyn but
what I also identified was just a larger
citywide issue of people struggling to
find the resources that were available
and you know I was able to
begin pushing out that information via
social media email lists these kind of
signal and whatsapp text chains and had
you know a bit of kind of knowledge and
experience about how to be both a
resource locator and a disseminator of
that information and so me and others
have kind of played that sort of guide
role for people who for the first time
maybe were struggling to find some of
those resources so if you were somewhere
else you're watching this you're not in
New York and you want to so you want to
set up your own mutual aid network you
want to provide your own Clearinghouse
for your community what would where
would you suggest people start the first
thing I would say is not to duplicate
resources or projects that already exist
or reinvent any sort of structure that
might have already taken hold in the
community so we're far enough along that
I think a lot of immediate needs are now
being met either by previously existing
organizations or by groups that have
come together in February in March in
April and you know oftentimes that
involves hunting around and trying to
find out what's been happening already
and who are the people to connect with
because a lot of the mutual aid that's
happening is not big budget website
staff you know infrastructure etc it's
you know people putting a phone number
on a flyer pasting it on some you know
up on some lampposts down the street and
then getting people out on foot or on
bikes you know to do grocery shopping
etc
so so you know part of the the challenge
that I was responding to and a challenge
that is being replicated you know in
cities across the country is helping
people to find those resources that
exist already so as a first step really
beginning to dig around and see what
exists in the community there are some
good kind of national level resources
that have been compiling that it's going
down is one news source that has a
pretty comprehensive list of mutual aid
organizations operating at the you know
the city or the community level and so
seeking out and joining up and
partnering with those existing
organizations like I mentioned earlier
the sorts of challenges that we are
facing under coronavirus are extreme but
not necessarily new and so when we think
about like well how do we respond to
people who don't have access to food the
people who are the best at that are the
folks who've been doing that for the
last year five year ten years etc who've
developed relationships in their
communities who know what the most
hardest hit areas will be Ruth built up
trust to have networks of both helpers
and those in need and so going to the
experts or going to people with those
years of experience tends to be able to
build up a stronger infrastructure and
to be able to you know learn from their
past experience that being said at least
in New York City
the need was was so large and so rapid
we did see a number of new organizations
starting up and there are now these
these guides coming out and these
resources about how to you know organize
your building which can be as simple as
posting a flyer and the law
be and setting up you know a whatsapp or
a signal chat so that everyone can stay
in touch and then moving from the
building to the street to the
neighborhood to the city as these kind
of expanding circles of both resources
and those in need but you know overall
we're now seeing I think a large kind of
groundswell of people coming together to
say you know we need to be prepared
around housing issues that come up for
people that can't pay rent we need to
worry about continuing to get people
access to medical care as hospitals are
becoming overburdened food insecurity
etc and you know organizations that are
doing this well tend to pay it forward
in some sense by putting out materials
resource guides tech handbooks etc that
do provide that information that can be
you know kind of used in a cookie cutter
model from city to city
there's definitely we're starting to see
the south we're starting to actually see
impacts and you're starting to see rural
communities that are having these issues
it's it's the same principle for those
that are in those areas they can be your
neighborhood it could be there there's
always those locations it's like here
where I live real small town you would
put this information at Sonic rather
than in a lobby of your building but
there's always a workaround there's
always a way to make it work and there's
probably already organizations in your
area doing it in the south probably that
guy at your church who's you know not
really that churchy but he coordinates a
lot of the charity work that's probably
the guy you want to talk to that's
that's probably the person that has the
connections in the community because
here a lot of it revolves around the
church even things that are secular and
I have noticed that a lot of times that
person is is not really what you would
consider faithful he's there because
that's where the resources are so if
you're in a rural community it can still
be done it doesn't have to only be done
in areas with high population density
but their models are probably more of
that active because they're designed
handle off much higher volume and we
would ever see out in the country so
anyway just further because we have a
lot of people that live in rural
communities that are looking for this
kind of information and don't really
know how to start so I would ask him
here here's well first I gotta ask the
question everybody wants to know how
does it feel to get to get to yell at
people the way that you haven't gotten
the press over it I often times describe
that as kind of the desert of organizing
or the little the little treat that that
comes once in awhile you know the real
valuable work I try and engage in is you
know long-term base building political
education pressure campaigns etc that
just involves a lot of time spent you
know planning meetings and on Skype
calls and you know putting together
resources but it's New York City and
ever so often there'll be an opportunity
for you know to go out on a you know on
a weekend and you know Sean Spicer is
doing a book tour or you know Howard
Schultz is running for president and you
know just the things that I think a lot
of people
think but don't necessarily get to say
at least not to the people they're
thinking them about I happen to have
that rare opportunity to say and you
know it I it's it's fun and I think it
it often works or you know works well
enough in part because I'm sometimes
saying something that a lot of other
people are thinking or the journalists
wish they could put in an article
they're constrained by you know the kind
of rules and practices of journalism
that they can't write it themselves and
they're just they're hoping and wishing
someone puts it into words and they're
able to you know pass it along and you
know and particularly around coronavirus
it's been frustrating because there's
been so much failure from our political
leadership in ways that is just being
you know totally unaddressed you know
we're seeing some pushback against Trump
you know from the press corps but
they're doing it in the way that the
press does which is you know
respectfully and you know with within
the kind of structure of political
journalism in America but you know at
some point the people who are directly
suffering because of you know mistakes
and poor decisions from Trump may get
the chance you know to express that to
him there have been really egregious
failures by Governor Cuomo and mayor de
Blasio in New York City that are just
really heightened the impact of
coronavirus in in New York
um and you know Governor Cuomo gets to
do his you know daily I guess press
press briefings where he's the strong
authoritative commanding voice and no
one is is really kind of bringing up
these past decisions and actions we're
more dramatic measures could have been
taken earlier to really curtail the
impact so on a you know the day to day
basis you know the work I'm doing around
mutual aid you know is hours and hours
every day of these kind of various
projects but the the little kind of
desert I may get at one point is running
into Cuomo or de Blasio and being able
to express myself towards them in a way
that I'm not hearing anyone say or that
is not being included in the media and
the way it should be right there
there's all blame as far as preparations
beforehand and acting on their own there
there's tons to go around for a whole
lot of people right now it is mainly
focused on the person that is most vocal
about perfect they were I have a feeling
that as more and more comes out and as
those pre-existing conditions within
different communities are highlighted
there's going to be a moment where
people look back and say wow we could
have solved this months before this ever
happened uh it's it's going to be a fun
moment for me because the way I
structure your stuff but yeah I
definitely would see that as a dirt
desert myself so here's a question I ask
everybody that comes on if you could
tell the people watching this one thing
that they can do in their community in
their hometown and their neighborhood
whatever to changed the world what would
be
yeah yeah I mean one of the challenges I
think of coronavirus is the scale of the
impact you know we're used to natural
disasters in the United States hurricane
tornado flood earthquake fire I'm from
California originally we have our share
of natural disasters and those can be
you know limited geographically they can
be limited in terms of of time in terms
of the number of people that that are
affected and this you know this
particular moment we're in feels very
unlimited and infinite and you know it's
it's expanding it's getting worse I
would say every day has been worse than
the day before
without really end in sight in terms of
the human impact you know as people are
not working and the kind of secondary
economic impacts continue to continue to
kind of snowball on the situation's
getting worse so the the recommendation
that I would have for people is to is to
narrow it down and think as small and as
local as they can and you know we can
talk a little bit about kind of the the
philosophical or the political nature of
mutual aid and what it is and why we do
it
etc but without kind of getting into the
weeds of that what I would say is any
one individual is already an expert in
the practice of mutual aid if you've
ever done something like mow your
neighbor's lawn or take them grocery
shopping or watch their kids
or set up one of those kind of meal
trains where you know such-and-such on
you know your coworker is recovering
from cancer or you know a relative
passed away and the spouse and children
are coping and people are bringing by
meals on a regular schedule etc these
are all I think experiences that we've
had that we're familiar with and that we
have expertise in and so for people to
kind of put aside you know just if
they're watching this tomorrow put aside
you know this upcoming election and the
stimulus checks and you know rents and
mortgages and think you know in my
building or on my block who are the
people in need and what is the skill or
experience that I might be able to
contribute I think that's a way to kind
of ground all of us in the work that
we're doing and to open up the sorts of
connections and build the relationships
that we're gonna need going forward
because we don't need to we don't need
to launch you know the neighborhood or
you know the the street the Street
Association coronavirus response
committee tomorrow you know that could
take some time or maybe it already
exists or you know other people are
gonna maybe take the lead on that
but what each of us can do is just kind
of check in with our neighbors figure
out how we can help and be someone
that's able to say you know if there's
something you need you can reach out to
me and I would like to be able to stay
in touch with you if there's something
that I need and at least in New York
City those sorts of conversations and
those sorts of connections are not
always common there are people who live
in apartment buildings that
do not know the names of the people in
their building there are people who live
you know on streets who cannot you know
have never had a conversation with the
people who live across the street from
them and that you know can be you know
replicated across the country and also
you know we have this pivotal moment now
of people being able to say we're only
going to be able to get through this if
we work together and that doesn't mean
solving the biggest problem
it doesn't mean solving the most
important problem but it means taking
the steps that will get us on closer to
solving those bigger and important
problems so we're what do you think the
longevity of these stuff is these are
organizations once they're built these
networks these community groups what
happens after the smoke clears do they
still do they work into something else
do they help address other issues
where's what's the dream where's it go
so I mentioned before that the problems
that we're facing now are not new but
they're larger in scope and so I think
it's you know I would say it basically a
certainty that the problems that we are
struggling to solve now will remain
problems after you know coronaviruses
over whatever exactly that means
you know let's say we come up with a
vaccine and a cure next year we no
longer have to worry about coronavirus
there will still be people struggling
with you know losing their jobs being in
danger of eviction getting food every
etc and it's it's useful for people in
this moment to get involved with this
sort of organizing because they can
continue to do that you know post
coronavirus there are you know some
specific ways that we're responding in
New York City that may not be essential
moving forward you know one of the major
needs that that we're dealing with is
people who are now homebound during
coronavirus because they are elderly or
immunocompromised or really in you know
it would be a danger for them to go
grocery shopping so we have teams of
volunteers who will go grocery shopping
for them you know in general someone who
may be you know you know elderly you
know it's it's fine for them to normally
go grocery shopping it's great for them
to be out in the community exercise is
nice sunlight is nice you know knowing
your kind of corner bodega guy and
having a conversation and having some
some communication is nice so we don't
we don't necessarily need to continue
grocery delivery but we need to continue
to assess what are the unmet needs of
the community but it's also I think
important to kind of situate this mutual
aid organizing that we're doing in terms
of a larger political context by which I
mean there's a focus right now on
meeting people's material needs whether
it's you know food medicine housing you
know anything else that kind of directly
the you know monetary needs that we can
meet but we're also you know I think
very cognizant of the ways
the kind of political and societal
structures have exacerbated the problems
of coronavirus so there's a big you know
debate in Congress right now about what
to do about people who are losing their
health insurance because they've lost
their jobs because of coronavirus and we
happen to have a system of health
insurance in America which for a lot of
people ties their health insurance to
their job and when someone loses their
job they oftentimes will also lose their
health insurance and we have people
who's you know housing is tied to their
ability to work access to food is tied
to their ability to work and it does not
have to be that way there are plenty of
other you know ways we can design
society ways we can set up government
programs that allow people who are fired
not to be in danger of being hungry
homeless and without medical care so as
we kind of think well in the medium to
long term what exactly are we going to
be doing in the future what's gonna
happen with these organizations that
we've built what's gonna happen with
this community power and capacity that's
being created well we're gonna meet
people's material needs in the short
term but we're also gonna think about
what our vision is for the future so
that the next disaster pandemic you know
emergency situation does not recreate
all of these emergency conditions and
all of these kind of secondary societal
impacts that have created so much damage
and destruction and those of us who've
been on calls and in meetings you know
focused on how do we get people food are
gonna say well you know in 2021
who's still hungry in our community and
how do we get them food but also what
are the changes that we need to make
what is the you know societal or
governmental shifts we need to push for
so that people are not going to be
hungry anymore
and there's a lot of visions about how
that can can change and how that can
function you know there's kind of
left-wing big government socialism there
is a kind of you know anarchist mutual a
non-governmental approach and a variety
of other ways you know and I don't I
don't have strong principled beliefs
about kind of the best way to solve all
these problems you know there's a
variety of ways we can talk about
getting people health care about making
sure that people who lose their jobs do
not become homeless and that is you know
an important you know an important
aspect to keep in our minds as we
struggle through coronavirus is not to
treat what's happening right now as
unique you know it's not there's nothing
unique about the way people are
struggling in New York City and across
the country people have always struggled
and the solutions that we should
envision are not just how do I get
people groceries for the next two weeks
but how do we solve a problem where
people in America in 2020 do not have
food in their apartments and cannot
afford food and you know that is not
that is worse because of coronavirus but
that is not new because of coronavirus
right okay all right so well where do
people need to go what do they need to
look up where it is everybody need to
kind of get more information and where
can they
yeah so you gave a bitly link at the top
of the show which is this information
and resources document for New York City
um you know bi tly slash NYC coronavirus
and that can give people in New York
City access really directly to
information and resources that they can
make use of but also is kind of
illustrating like I mentioned earlier
people all over the country being able
to see what sort of practices are are
you know are ratcheting up in New York
City
how organizations are responding some
best practices etc because New York
really was at kind of the beginning of
this wave across the country was hit
especially hard you know I'm part of a
group also called bed-stuy strong
bed-stuy is a neighborhood in Brooklyn
and we have our own website that's died
strong calm which again you know really
kind of allows people to see what this
looks like in practice at the
neighborhood level and then I mentioned
it's going down which is just a
nationwide publication which has been
you know collecting their own sort of
information and research documents about
what's been happening across the country
but again you know for you know any
major city in the United States there
have been people struggling with food
insecurity housing insecurity poverty
etc and already existing organizations
and groups of people have been working
on solving those problems and those
organizations you know as a general rule
are under resource they don't have the
the volunteers to respond they don't
have the money to respond during you
know good times when we're not dealing
with a global pandemic
so you know any organization that I can
think of or that I'm aware of is being
hit even harder and they're out there
right now and if you have time and you
can volunteer you can give time if you
have money and you can donate you can
give money and if you're someone in need
you can reach out because really kind of
one of the underlying philosophies of
this sort of mutual aid organizing is a
participatory process there's not you
know the people with resources providing
and those in need taking but everyone
has something to contribute and everyone
has the opportunity to make use of that
and I think what we're seeing under
coronavirus is that everyone is being
impacted everyone is being affected and
we all have something to contribute and
we all I think are gonna face struggles
and challenges and are going to need to
be able to identify the resources we can
reach out to that will be able to help
us okay pretty well yeah I think I
closed on a nice summation of what I was
trying to express and so I won't don't
feel the need to belabor it all right
okay well then that's it's just